Bacteroides fragilis is an anaerobic, Gramnegative, pleomorphic to rodshaped bacterium. It is part of the normal microbiota of the human colon and is generally commensal, but can cause infection if displaced into the bloodstream or surrounding tissue following surgery, disease, or trauma.

Bacteroides fragilis resides in the human gastrointestinal tract and is essential to healthy gastrointestinal function such as mucosal immunity and host nutrition. As a mesophile, optimal growth occurs at  °C and a pH around .
Cells of B. fragilis are rodshaped to pleomorphic with a cell size range of .. x .. μm.B. fragilis is a Gramnegative bacterium and does not possess flagella or cilia making it immotile. However, it does utilize peritrichous fimbriae for adhesion to other molecular structures. B. fragilis also utilizes a complex series of surface proteins, lipopolysaccharide chains, and outer membrane vesicles to help survive the volatile intestinal microenvironment.
B. fragilis is a aerotolerant, anaerobic chemoorganotroph capable of fermenting a wide variety of glycans available in the human gut microenvironment including glucose, sucrose,  fructose. Can also catabolize a variety of biopolymers, polysaccharides, and glycoproteins into smaller molecules which can then be used and further broken down by other microbes. Also produces fatty acid as a byproduct of carbohydrate fermentation which can then be used as energy by the host. It was discovered that Cytochrome bd oxidase is essential to oxygen consumption. This can allow other obligate anaerobes to survive in the now oxygenreduced microenvironment. Animals lacking gut bacteria require  more caloric intake to maintain body mass.
The complex environmentalsensory system allows B. fragilis to surviveadapt in the everchanging human gut microbiome. This system is composed ofdesigned to effectively handle:
Bacteriocins: B. fragilis intestinal isolates secrete high levels of bacteriocin proteins and are resistant to other bacteriocins secreted by other closely related isolates. This mechanism is believed to reduce the level of intraspecific competition.
Bile salt resistance: Utilizes enzymes such as "bile salt hydrolase" to resist the degrading effects of bile salts. Detergent activity of bile salts can permeabilize bacterial membranes which can eventually lead to membrane collapse andor cell damage.
Oxidative Stress Response: Proteins such as catalase, superoxide dismutase,  alkyl hydroperoxide reductase protect the organism from harmful oxygen radicals. This permits growth in the presence of nanomolar concentrations of O.
Member of the genus Bacteroides are characterized with having the highest numbers of antibiotic resistance mechanisms accompanied by the highest resistance rates amongst anaerobic bacteria. Species of the Bacteroidaceae have displayed increasing resistance to antimicrobial agents such as cefoxitin, clindamycin, metronidazole, carbapenems,  fluoroquinalones.
Resistance Reservoirs: Bacteroides species accumulate a variety of antibioticantimicrobial resistance genes as they reside in the gastrointestinal tract. This allows the genetic transfer of these genes to other Bacteroides species and possibly other more virulent bacteria leading to an overall increase in multidrug resistance. This is exacerbated by the tendency of resistance genes to be relatively stable even without the presence of the antibiotic.
The B. fragilis group is the most commonly isolated Bacteroidaceae in anaerobic infections, especially those that originate from the gastrointestinal microbiota. B. fragilis is the most prevalent organism in the B. fragilis group, accounting for  to  of the isolates of the group. These organisms are resistant to penicillin by virtue of production of betalactamase, and by other unknown factors.
This group was formerly classified as subspecies of B. fragilis i.e. B. f. ssp. fragilis, B. f. ssp. distasonis, B. f. ssp. ovatus, B. f. ssp. thetaiotaomicron, and B. f. ssp. vulgatus. They have been reclassified into distinct species on the basis of DNA homology studies. B. fragilis formerly known as B. f. ssp. fragilis is often recovered from blood, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, wounds, and brain abscesses.
Although the B. fragilis group is the most common species found in clinical specimens, it is the least common Bacteroides present in fecal microbiota, comprising only . of the bacteria present in stool. Their pathogenicity partly results from their ability to produce capsular polysaccharide, which is protective against phagocytosis and stimulates abscess formation.
Bacteroides fragilis is involved in  of anaerobic peritoneal infections. It also causes bacteremia associated with intraabdominal infections, peritonitis and abscesses following rupture of viscus, and subcutaneous abscesses or burnsnear the anus. Though it is gram negative, it has an altered LPS and does not cause endotoxic shock. Untreated B. fragilis infections have a  mortality rate.
