
Bacteroides caccae is a saccharolytic gramnegative bacterium from the genus Bacteroides. They are obligate anaerobes first isolated from human feces in the s. Prior to their discovery, they were known as the A DNA homology group. The type strain is now identified as ATCC .
Bacteroides caccae is a saccharolytic anaerobic, nonmotile Gramnegative bacteria. They have a DNA GC content of  mol . Growth occurs at human temperature  °C under anaerobic conditions. There is no growth at  °C or  °C. Its cell shapes are rods that are .. by . µm in size. The rods are found in single cells or in pairs. In a broth culture mixed with a fermentable carbohydrate, the cells will appear vacuolated or beaded. The surface colonies of cells grown on BHI blood agar plates following  hours of incubation show a circular cell of .– mm in diameter. In addition, colonies are convex, gray, translucent, shiny, and smooth. Growth on rabbit blood shows slight hemolysis. In glucose broth, the cultures appear turbid with a smooth sediment and a final pH range of  – ..
The type strain reduces neutral red but does not produce hydrogen sulfide. Growth on peptoneyeast extractglucose broth cultures with  bile yields vast amounts of acetate and succinate but minor amounts of propionate and isovalerate. Lactate and threonine are not used by the type strain. B. caccae produces a trace amount of . of hydrogen. They hydrolyze esculin, weakly digest gelatin, and are susceptible to chloramphenicol and clindamycin, but not susceptible to penicillin G and tetracycline.
For the onset of intestinal bowel diseases IBD such as Crohn's disease CD or Ulcerative colitis UC, commensal enteric bacteria are generally required as a pathogenic factor. B. caccae contains a TonBlinked outer membrane protein called OmpW that has only been characterized in this particular strain. The OmpW protein contains features similar to a bacterial TonBlinked outer membrane protein which allows the bacteria to increase its ability of iron or vitamin uptake in an environment where it lacks these variables. The TonBlinked outer membrane protein contains a TonB box that is highly conserved and also present in OmpW. OmpW may play a role in facilitating the organism's ability to uptake substrates that are important for commensal bacterial survival in the intestine. The immunological finding of OmpW is an elevation of antiOmpW IgA levels in some patients with Crohn's disease in comparison to these IgA levels in patients with ulcerative colitis or healthy subjects. More remains to be elucidated on its potential pathogenicity with regards to OmpW. In addition, B. caccae has also been found in cultures from infections in the appendix and the abdomen peritoneal 
Bacteroides caccae was specified as being a fiberdegrading microbial specialist in the microbiomes of Western individuals. In a study geared at determining the fermentation of pectin in B. caccae from a rabbit cecum, it was determined that cultures grown with pectin produced more acetate than formate, lactate, fumarate, and succinate as opposed to those cultures grown on glucose which yielded vast amounts of lactate. This elucidates the metabolism of a plant fiber by a human commensal. In addition, B. caccae showed no growth on arabinan a pectin, arabinoxylan wheat, xylan, xyloglucan, glucomannan, galactomannan, Bglucan, lichenin, and laminarin. They do grow on hostderived glycans like neutral mucin Oglycans, chondroitin sulfate, and hyaluronic acid. The monosaccharides that induce growth are arabinose, fructose, fucose, galactose, galacturonic acid, glucose, glucuronic acid, glucosamine, mannose, Nacetylgalactosamine, Nacetylglucosamine, Nacetylneuraminic acid, rhamnose, ribose, and xylose
