
Bilophila wadsworthia is a gramnegative, obligately anaerobic, catalasepositive, bileresistant, and asaccharolytic bacillus. This bacterium is about . μm wide by .–. μm long in colony and the cells are pleomorphic with irregular cell walls. This bacterial species is mostly urease positive; around  of the strains are urease positive. Less than . of the human gut microbiota is this bacterium. B. wadsworthia is linked to various diseases and is not well known due to frequent misidentification of the bacteria. The two unique characteristics of B. wadsworthia are the utilisation of the sulfated amino acid taurine in the production of hydrogen sulfide and the rapid catalase reaction. This bacterium is vulnerable to the antibiotics: imipenem, ceoxitin, and ticarcillin, which are all βlactam antibiotics.
B. wadsworthia is a gramnegative, catalasepositive, and usually ureasepositive bacterium. Although most strains are urease positive, there are some strains that are urease negative. This bacterium, due to its slow nature to grow in standard media for anaerobes, is often misidentified as other anaerobes or not identified at all. The best identifier for this bacterium is a transparent colony with a black center in BBE agar; the black center is ferrous sulfide, which is created by the hydrogen sulfide the bacteria produces. Another unique characteristic of B. wadsworthia is its positive catalase reaction with a  hydrogen peroxide reagent; its catalase reaction is unlike other catalasepositive species because the reaction is explosive with bubble formation and is very quick.  The most accurate method to identify this bacterium from other similar species is through gas liquid chromatography GLC; GLC results show that there are a lot of acetic acid peaks and minimal succinic acid present. B. wadsworthia is nonmotile and is nonspore forming. In addition, this bacterium has irregular cell walls and no flagella attached to it. The two factors that stimulate its growth are bile and pyruvate; specifically,  bile and  pyruvate.
One of the main processes that occur in B. wadsworthia is hydrogen sulfide production, which is the product responsible for the bacterium's signature black dot. B. wadsworthia is able to produce hydrogen sulfide through its taurine desulfonation pathway using isethionate sulfitelyase IslA. The bacterium converts taurine to hydrogen sulfide when it respires taurine. The production of hydrogen sulfide is connected to the human intestinal microbiota; although there are some benefits to hydrogen sulfide production in the gut like cardioprotection, hydrogen sulfide production also contributes to disease pathology. Production of hydrogen sulfide has been linked to irritable bowel disease IBD by damaging the gut epithelium's mucus layer and to colorectal cancer. In addition, during treatments with antibiotics, hydrogen sulfide can aide opportunistic bacteria grow leading to antibiotic resistance. Future research on controlling hydrogen sulfide production may help address B. wadsworthia's contribution to diseases.
The bacteria must be grown on this agar for at least  days in order to see colony formation. Starting from day , two possible types of colonies appear. First, a  mm diameter convex and irregular colony with a black center is visible. Second, a translucent umbonate and circular colony with a dark center is present.  In addition, βlactamase is not produced in this agar and the colonies formed in BBE agar pass the positive urease test. BBE agar is the optimal agar for B. wadsworthia colony growth.
The bacteria similar to the BBE agar must be incubated on the agar for at least  days.  In this agar, a .. mm diameter raised, circular erose colony is visible. Also, the colony is gray and translucent.
Although the preferred location for this bacterium is still unknown, it is mostly found in the lower parts of the gastrointestinal tract. This bacterium is considered virulent in nature because it is commonly found in patients with appendicitis, gangrenous appendicitis, and the blood cultures of patients with liver abscesses; it is the thirdmost abundant anaerobic bacterium found in patients with appendicitis. Also, they are found in the feces samples of healthy patients. In nonhuman cases, this bacterium is found in dogs with periodontal disease. In rare cases, this bacterium may be found in saliva and vaginal samples.
Other specimen locations where B. wadsworthia have been found include:
B. wadsworthia was first identified in  by Ellen Jo Baron,
 who was director of the Clinical Anaerobic Bacteriology Research Laboratory at the V.A. Wadsworth Medical Center now the West Los Angeles VA Medical Center which is the source of its name.
It was found in specimens collected from patients with perforated appendicitis and gangrenous appendicitis; the bacterium was also found in healthy fecal specimens. This bacterium was categorized into the genus Bilophila because of its bileloving and growing nature.
