
C. canimorsus
C. cynodegmi
C. gingivalis
C. granulosa
C. haemolytica
C. leadbetteri
C. ochracea
C. sputigena
Capnocytophaga is a genus of Gramnegative bacteria. Normally found in the oropharyngeal tract of mammals, they are involved in the pathogenesis of some animal bite wounds and periodontal diseases.
The term Capnocytophaga comes from "capno" for its dependence on CO and "cytophaga" for its flexibility and mobility shift gliding motility. It belongs to the family Flavobacteriaceae, order  Flavobacteriales. This genus includes eight different species: C. ochracea, C. gingivalis, C. granulosa, C. haemolytica, C. sputigena, C. leadbetteri isolated oral cavity of humans, C. canimorsus, and C. cynodegmi isolated from the oral cavity of animals. Many strains  have also been described whose classification remains uncertain.
Capnocytophaga spp. are fusiform Gramnegative bacilli, and are part of the oral commensal flora. 
Microscopic observation revealed a high degree of polymorphism, with a variation in the size and appearance depending on the strain and culture conditions. This polymorphism is also reflected in the observation of colonies orangepigmented colonies, spreading on agar, etc.. Capnocytophaga spp. are capnophilic bacteria; they can live only in environments where the concentration of carbon dioxide is greater than that of the atmosphere at least  CO. They can also grow anaerobically. They require enriched media, type blood agar, incubated at ʡC. The isolation of strains of Capnocytophaga from polymicrobial samples is also possible on selective media containing antibiotics.
The identification is carried out through various biochemical tests, used for the identification of Gramnegative bacterial species, and rapid determination of enzymatic reactions. The diagnosis is delayed because of the slow and difficult growth of Capnocytophaga  to  hours. The molecular techniques S rDNA PCR and sequencing, and mass spectrometry appear as attractive methods for reliable identification to the genus. The identification at the species level remains difficult when a single method is used.
Capnocytophaga is a commensal genus considered as an opportunistic pathogen. These bacteria are involved in different types of infections, the severity of which depends on the immune status of the patient. In the literature, cases were reported in immunocompromised and immunocompetent patients. In immunocompetent patients, these bacteria belong to the oral bacterial community responsible for periodontal infections affecting and destroying the supporting tissues of teeth periodontal tissue. Capnocytophaga strains are often isolated from periodontal pockets, but also from apical and periodontal abscesses, in association with other bacterial parodontal species. This condition increase alveolar bone loss, attachment loss, tooth mobility, and finally tooth loss. 
It can cause other diseases widely reported in the literature, such as bacteremia potentially complicated by septic shock, infections of the musculoskeletal system osteomyelitis, arthritis, lung empyema, lung abscess, digestive peritonitis, maternalfetal ovarian abscess, chorioamnionitis, eye conjunctivitis, heart endocartitis or brain meningitis. Capnocytophaga is clinically important in pediatric oncology and hematology, especially when patients are in aplasia. C. canimorsus and C. cynodegmi are commonly transmitted by dog bites and known to cause sepsis, potentially complicated by thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic uremic syndrome, in immunocompromised patients
Capnocytophaga spp. are usually susceptible to antibiotics, but the emergence of betalactamresistant strains has been observed as early as . Genes for antibiotic resistance have gradually spread among other pathogenic bacterial species by horizontal gene transfer. Susceptibility to various betalactam antibiotics has been described as variable depending on the strain of Capnocytophaga. This resistance is often linked to the production of beta lactamases. Most betalactamases identified in Bacteroides, Prevotella, and Capnocytophaga belong to the Ambler class A. Several betalactamases encoded by the chromosome or a plasmid and associated with mobile genetic elements have been described in Capnocytophaga spp. The most common are: CfxA, CfxA, CepA, CblA, andor CSP.
Capnocytophaga spp. can be resistant to thirdgeneration cephalosporins, but remain susceptible to imipenem, cefoxitin, and amoxicillin combined with clavulanic acid. Although resistant strains are most frequently isolated in oral cavities, their prevalence is worrying, JolivetGougeon et al., ; Sixou et al., .
The CfxA broad spectrum beta lactamases CfxA, CfxA and CfxA belong to the group e of Bush classification. This class includes betalactamase enzymes with significant activity against cephalosporins and monobactams, rather than penicillins.
Following the characterization of CfxA beta lactamase in B. vulgatus and CfxA betalactamase in P. intermedia nucleotide Genbank under accession number AF, a new group e of Bush classification named CfxA nucleotide GenBank under accession number AF has been characterized in C. ochracea E JolivetGougeon et al. . The cfxA gene has  identity with cfxA of B. vulgatus and cfxA of P. intermedia. The analysis of the  bp nucleotide sequence showed that the gene encoding betalactamase CfxA in C. ochracea E differs from cfxA gene of B. vulgatus by substitution of two amino acids KE and YD and from cfxA gene of P. intermedia by a substitution of one amino acid YD. CfxA was different from CfxA because of an aspartic acid in place of tyrosine at position  and from CfxA because of a glutamic acid instead of a lysine at position .
In , Handal et al. b identified a novel Ambler class A betalactamase called CSP from a NOR C. sputigena strain, resistant to amoxicillin and first and second generation cephalosporins. The new beta lactamase had  homology with CfxA,  with CblA and  with CepA. CSP is encoded by the blaCSP  gene GenBank nucleotide sequence under accession number GQ. The GC content  of this gene, its genetic environment, the lack of conjugal transfer and its detection in two reference strains suggest that it is an intrinsic resistance gene located on chromosome.
CepA Chromosomal cephalosporinase from Bacteroides fragilis belonging to Ambler class A is an endogenous cephalosporinase A described in Bacteroides fragilis. This beta lactamase is ubiquitous, but frequently inactive. CepA is encoded by the cepA gene, most frequently vertically transferred Boente et al. .
CblA Chromosomal betalactamase from Bacteroides uniformis belonging to Ambler class A is a specific endogenous cephalosporinase described in B. uniformis, susceptible to clavulanic acid.
The homology is  between protein sequences CepA and CblA and  between nucleotide sequences. A comparison with protein sequence alignment by cepA with other beta lactamases reveals the conservation of at least four common elements of Ambler class A.
According to studies, different sensitivities were reported for macrolides, rifampin, quinolones, metronidazole, vancomycin, and aminoglycosides, but the mechanism involved is not precisely described.
The high frequency of strains producing betalactamase limit the use of single betalactam antibiotics as firstline treatment, which underlies the need to test the in vitro susceptibility of clinical isolates. Many antimicrobial treatments were used despite a lack of randomized trials and guidelines relating to the duration of treatment according to infected sites. The imipenemcilastatin, clindamycin, or combinations containing an inhibitor of betalactamases i.e. Augmentin, Unasyn are always effective and their use can be recommended.  For Capnocytophaga canimorsus, the drug of choice is penicillin G, given with or without a betalactamase inhibitor depending on resistance.
