


Escherichia coli ˌɛʃəˈrɪkiə ˈkoʊlaɪ, also known as E. coli ˌiː ˈkoʊlaɪ, is a Gramnegative, facultative anaerobic, rodshaped, coliform bacterium of the genus Escherichia that is commonly found in the lower intestine of warmblooded organisms. Most E. coli strains are harmless, but some serotypes EPEC, ETEC etc. can cause serious food poisoning in their hosts, and are occasionally responsible for food contamination incidents that prompt product recalls. The harmless strains are part of the normal microbiota of the gut, and can benefit their hosts by producing vitamin K, and preventing colonisation of the intestine with pathogenic bacteria, having a mutualistic relationship. E. coli is expelled into the environment within fecal matter.  The bacterium grows massively in fresh fecal matter under aerobic conditions for three days, but its numbers decline slowly afterwards.
E. coli and other facultative anaerobes constitute about . of gut microbiota, and fecal–oral transmission is the major route through which pathogenic strains of the bacterium cause disease. Cells are able to survive outside the body for a limited amount of time, which makes them potential indicator organisms to test environmental samples for fecal contamination. A growing body of research, though, has examined environmentally persistent E. coli which can survive for many days and grow outside a host.
The bacterium can be grown and cultured easily and inexpensively in a laboratory setting, and has been intensively investigated for over  years. E. coli is a chemoheterotroph whose chemically defined medium must include a source of carbon and energy. E. coli is the most widely studied prokaryotic model organism, and an important species in the fields of biotechnology and microbiology, where it has served as the host organism for the majority of work with recombinant DNA. Under favorable conditions, it takes as little as  minutes to reproduce.
E. coli is a Gramnegative, facultative anaerobe, nonsporulating coliform bacterium.  Cells are typically rodshaped, and are about . μm long and .–. μm in diameter, with a cell volume of .–. μm.  Antibiotics can effectively treat E. coli infections outside the digestive tract and most intestinal infections but are not used to treat intestinal infections by one strain of these bacteria. The flagella which allow the bacteria to swim have a peritrichous arrangement. It also attaches and effaces to the microvilli of the intestines via an adhesion molecule known as intimin.
E. coli can live on a wide variety of substrates and uses mixed acid fermentation in anaerobic conditions, producing lactate, succinate, ethanol, acetate, and carbon dioxide. Since many pathways in mixedacid fermentation produce hydrogen gas, these pathways require the levels of hydrogen to be low, as is the case when E. coli lives together with hydrogenconsuming organisms, such as methanogens or sulphatereducing bacteria.
In addition, E. coli's metabolism can be rewired to solely use CO as the source of carbon for biomass production. In other words, this obligate heterotroph's metabolism can be altered to display autotrophic capabilities by heterologously expressing carbon fixation genes as well as formate dehydrogenase and conducting laboratory evolution experiments. This may be done by using formate to reduce electron carriers and supply the ATP required in anabolic pathways inside of these synthetic autotrophs.
E. coli have three native glycolytic pathways: EMPP, EDP, and OPPP. The EMPP employs ten enzymatic steps to yield two pyruvates, two ATP, and two NADH per glucose molecule  while OPPP serves as an oxidation route for NADPH synthesis. Although the EDP is the more thermodynamically favorable of the three pathways, E. coli do not use the EDP for glucose metabolism, relying mainly on the EMPP and the OPPP. The EDP mainly remains inactive except for during growth with gluconate.
When growing in the presence of a mixture of sugars, bacteria will often consume the sugars sequentially through a process known as catabolite repression. By repressing the expression of the genes involved in metabolizing the less preferred sugars, cells will usually first consume the sugar yielding the highest growth rate, followed by the sugar yielding the next highest growth rate, and so on. In doing so the cells ensure that their limited metabolic resources are being used to maximize the rate of growth. The wellused example of this with E. coli involves the growth of the bacterium on glucose and lactose, where E. coli will consume glucose before lactose. Catabolite repression has also been observed in E. coli in the presence of other nonglucose sugars, such as arabinose and xylose, sorbitol, rhamnose, and ribose. In E. coli, glucose catabolite repression is regulated by the phosphotransferase system, a multiprotein phosphorylation cascade that couples glucose uptake and metabolism.
Optimum growth of E. coli occurs at  °C  °F, but some laboratory strains can multiply at temperatures up to  °C  °F. E. coli grows in a variety of defined laboratory media, such as lysogeny broth, or any medium that contains glucose, ammonium phosphate monobasic, sodium chloride, magnesium sulfate, potassium phosphate dibasic, and water. Growth can be driven by aerobic or anaerobic respiration, using a large variety of redox pairs, including the oxidation of pyruvic acid, formic acid, hydrogen, and amino acids, and the reduction of substrates such as oxygen, nitrate, fumarate, dimethyl sulfoxide, and trimethylamine Noxide. E. coli is classified as a facultative anaerobe. It uses oxygen when it is present and available. It can, however, continue to grow in the absence of oxygen using fermentation or anaerobic respiration. The ability to continue growing in the absence of oxygen is an advantage to bacteria because their survival is increased in environments where water predominates.
The bacterial cell cycle is divided into three stages.  The B period occurs between the completion of cell division and the beginning of DNA replication.  The C period encompasses the time it takes to replicate the chromosomal DNA.  The D period refers to the stage between the conclusion of DNA replication and the end of cell division.  The doubling rate of E. coli is higher when more nutrients are available.  However, the length of the C and D periods do not change, even when the doubling time becomes less than the sum of the C and D periods.  At the fastest growth rates, replication begins before the previous round of replication has completed, resulting in multiple replication forks along the DNA and overlapping cell cycles.
The number of replication forks in fast growing E. coli typically follows n n  ,  or . This only happens if replication is initiated simultaneously from all origins of replications, and is referred to as synchronous replication. However, not all cells in a culture replicate synchronously. In this case cells do not have multiples of two replication forks. Replication initiation is then referred to being asynchronous. However, asynchrony can be caused by mutations to for instance DnaA or DnaA initiatorassociating protein DiaA.
E. coli and related bacteria possess the ability to transfer DNA via bacterial conjugation or transduction, which allows genetic material to spread horizontally through an existing population. The process of transduction, which uses the bacterial virus called a bacteriophage, is where the spread of the gene encoding for the Shiga toxin from the Shigella bacteria to E. coli helped produce E. coli O:H, the Shiga toxinproducing strain of E. coli.
E. coli encompasses an enormous population of bacteria that exhibit a very high degree of both genetic and phenotypic diversity. Genome sequencing of many isolates of E. coli and related bacteria shows that a taxonomic reclassification would be desirable. However, this has not been done, largely due to its medical importance, and E. coli remains one of the most diverse bacterial species: only  of the genes in a typical E. coli genome is shared among all strains.
In fact, from the more constructive point of view, the members of genus Shigella S. dysenteriae, S. flexneri, S. boydii, and S. sonnei should be classified as E. coli strains, a phenomenon termed taxa in disguise. Similarly, other strains of E. coli e.g. the K strain commonly used in recombinant DNA work are sufficiently different that they would merit reclassification.

A strain is a subgroup within the species that has unique characteristics that distinguish it from other strains. These differences are often detectable only at the molecular level; however, they may result in changes to the physiology or lifecycle of the bacterium. For example, a strain may gain pathogenic capacity, the ability to use a unique carbon source, the ability to take upon a particular ecological niche, or the ability to resist antimicrobial agents. Different strains of E. coli are often hostspecific, making it possible to determine the source of fecal contamination in environmental samples. For example, knowing which E. coli strains are present in a water sample allows researchers to make assumptions about whether the contamination originated from a human, another mammal, or a bird.A common subdivision system of E. coli, but not based on evolutionary relatedness, is by serotype, which is based on major surface antigens O antigen: part of lipopolysaccharide layer; H: flagellin; K antigen: capsule, e.g. O:H. It is, however, common to cite only the serogroup, i.e. the Oantigen. At present, about  serogroups are known. The common laboratory strain has a mutation that prevents the formation of an Oantigen and is thus not typeable.
Like all lifeforms, new strains of E. coli evolve through the natural biological processes of mutation, gene duplication, and horizontal gene transfer; in particular,  of the genome of the laboratory strain MG was horizontally acquired since the divergence from Salmonella. E. coli K and E. coli B strains are the most frequently used varieties for laboratory purposes. Some strains develop traits that can be harmful to a host animal. These virulent strains typically cause a bout of diarrhea that is often selflimiting in healthy adults but is frequently lethal to children in the developing world. More virulent strains, such as O:H, cause serious illness or death in the elderly, the very young, or the immunocompromised.
The genera Escherichia and Salmonella diverged around  million years ago credibility interval: – mya, an event unrelated to the much earlier see Synapsid divergence of their hosts: the former being found in mammals and the latter in birds and reptiles. This was followed by a split of an Escherichia ancestor into five species E. albertii, E. coli, E. fergusonii, E. hermannii, and E. vulneris. The last E. coli ancestor split between  and  million years ago.

The longterm evolution experiments using E. coli, begun by Richard Lenski in , have allowed direct observation of genome evolution over more than , generations in the laboratory. For instance, E. coli typically do not have the ability to grow aerobically with citrate as a carbon source, which is used as a diagnostic criterion with which to differentiate E. coli from other, closely, related bacteria such as Salmonella. In this experiment, one population of E. coli unexpectedly evolved the ability to aerobically metabolize citrate, a major evolutionary shift with some hallmarks of microbial speciation.In the microbial world, a relationship of predation can be established similar to that observed in the animal world. Considered, it has been seen that E. coli is the prey of multiple generalist predators, such as Myxococcus xanthus. In this predatorprey relationship, a parallel evolution of both species is observed through genomic and phenotypic modifications, in the case of E. coli the modifications are modified in two aspects involved in their virulence such as mucoid production excessive production of exoplasmic acid alginate  and the suppression of the OmpT gene, producing in future generations a better adaptation of one of the species that is counteracted by the evolution of the other, following a coevolutionary model demonstrated by the Red Queen hypothesis.
E. coli is the type species of the genus Escherichia and in turn Escherichia is the type genus of the family Enterobacteriaceae, where the family name does not stem from the genus Enterobacter  "i" sic.  "aceae", but from "enterobacterium"  "aceae" enterobacterium being not a genus, but an alternative trivial name to enteric bacterium.
The original strain described by Escherich is believed to be lost, consequently a new type strain neotype was chosen as a representative: the neotype strain is UT, also known under the deposit names DSM , ATCC , and NCTC , which is pathogenic to chickens and has an O:K:H serotype. However, in most studies, either O:H, K MG, or K W were used as a representative E. coli. The genome of the type strain has only lately been sequenced.
Many strains belonging to this species have been isolated and characterised. In addition to serotype vide supra, they can be classified according to their phylogeny, i.e. the inferred evolutionary history, as shown below where the species is divided into six groups. Particularly the use of whole genome sequences yields highly supported phylogenies. Based on such data, five subspecies of E. coli were distinguished.
The link between phylogenetic distance "relatedness" and pathology is small, e.g. the O:H serotype strains, which form a clade "an exclusive group"group E beloware all enterohaemorragic strains EHEC, but not all EHEC strains are closely related. In fact, four different species of Shigella are nested among E. coli strains vide supra, while E. albertii and E. fergusonii are outside this group.
Indeed, all Shigella species were placed within a single subspecies of E. coli in a phylogenomic study that included the type strain, and for this reason an according reclassification is difficult.
All commonly used research strains of E. coli belong to group A and are derived mainly from Clifton's K strain λ F; O and to a lesser degree from d'Herelle's Bacillus coli strain B strain O.
Salmonella enterica
E. albertii
E. fergusonii
E. coli SE O:H. Commensal
E. coli E O:H. Enteropathogenic
E. coli EDa O Commensal
E. coli CFT O:K:H. UPEC
E. coli APEC O O:K:H. APEC
E. coli UTI O:K:H. UPEC
E. coli S  O:K. Extracellular pathogenic
E. coli F
E. coli 
E. coli UMN O:K:H. Extracellular pathogenic
E. coli O:H. Extracellular pathogenic
E. coli O:K. Extracellular pathogenic
E. coli EDL O:H  EHEC
E. coli Sakai O:H EHEC
E. coli EC O:H EHEC
E. coli TW O:H EHEC
Shigella dysenteriae
Shigella sonnei
Shigella boydii
Shigella flexneri
E. coli EA O:H. Enterotoxigenic
E. coli E
E. coli  O:H. EHEC
E. coli  O:H. EHEC
E. coli IAI O Commensal
E. coli  EIEC
E. coli SE O:H. Commensal
E. coli BA
E. coli  O:H. EHEC
E. coli GOS O:H EAHEC German  outbreak
E. coli E
E. coli Oslo O
E. coli  O:H. Enteroaggressive
E. coli HS O:H. Commensal
E. coli ATCC O. Crook's E.coli used in phage work in the s
E. coli K W O. λ− F− "wild type" molecular biology strain
E. coli K DHb O. high electrocompetency molecular biology strain
E. coli K DH  O. high chemical competency molecular biology strain
E. coli K MG O. λ− F− "wild type" molecular biology strain
E. coli BW O. competent molecular biology strain
E. coli  O? H?. EAEC
E. coli B REL O. high competency molecular biology strain
E. coli BLDE O. expression molecular biology strain with T polymerase for pET system
The first complete DNA sequence of an E. coli genome laboratory strain K derivative MG was published in . It is a circular DNA molecule . million base pairs in length, containing  annotated proteincoding genes organized into  operons, seven ribosomal RNA rRNA operons, and  transfer RNA tRNA genes. Despite having been the subject of intensive genetic analysis for about  years, many of these genes were previously unknown. The coding density was found to be very high, with a mean distance between genes of only  base pairs. The genome was observed to contain a significant number of transposable genetic elements, repeat elements, cryptic prophages, and bacteriophage remnants.
More than three hundred complete genomic sequences of Escherichia and Shigella species are known. The genome sequence of the type strain of E. coli was added to this collection before . Comparison of these sequences shows a remarkable amount of diversity; only about  of each genome represents sequences present in every one of the isolates, while around  of each genome can vary among isolates. Each individual genome contains between , and , genes, but the total number of different genes among all of the sequenced E. coli strains the pangenome exceeds ,. This very large variety of component genes has been interpreted to mean that twothirds of the E. coli pangenome originated in other species and arrived through the process of horizontal gene transfer.
Genes in E. coli are usually named in accordance with the uniform nomenclature proposed by Demerec et al. Gene names are letter acronyms that derive from their function when known or mutant phenotype and are italicized. When multiple genes have the same acronym, the different genes are designated by a capital later that follows the acronym and is also italicized. For instance, recA is named after its role in homologous recombination plus the letter A. Functionally related genes are named recB, recC, recD etc. The proteins are named by uppercase acronyms, e.g. RecA, RecB, etc. When the genome of E. coli strain K substr. MG was sequenced, all known or predicted proteincoding genes were numbered more or less in their order on the genome and abbreviated by b numbers, such as b  recD. The "b" names were created after Fred Blattner, who led the genome sequence effort. Another numbering system was introduced with the sequence of another E. coli K substrain, W, which was sequenced in Japan and hence uses numbers starting by JW... Japanese W, e.g. JW  recD.  Hence, recD  b  JW. Note, however, that most databases have their own numbering system, e.g. the EcoGene database  uses EG for recD. Finally, ECK numbers are specifically used for alleles in the MG strain of E. coli K. Complete lists of genes and their synonyms can be obtained from databases such as EcoGene or Uniprot.
The genome sequence of E. coli predicts  proteincoding genes, of which  percent initially had no attributed function. Comparison with five other sequenced microbes reveals ubiquitous as well as narrowly distributed gene families; many families of similar genes within E. coli are also evident. The largest family of paralogous proteins contains  ABC transporters. The genome as a whole is strikingly organized with respect to the local direction of replication; guanines, oligonucleotides possibly related to replication and recombination, and most genes are so oriented. The genome also contains insertion sequence IS elements, phage remnants, and many other patches of unusual composition indicating genome plasticity through horizontal transfer.
Several studies have experimentally investigated the proteome of E. coli. By , ,  of the predicted proteins open reading frames, ORFs had been identified experimentally. Mateus et al.  detected , proteins with at least  peptides  of all proteins.
Although much fewer bacterial proteins seem to have posttranslational modifications PTMs compared to eukaryotic proteins, a substantial number of proteins are modified in E. coli. For instance, Potel et al.  found  phosphoproteins of which  were phosphorylated on histidine. Interestingly, the majority of phosphorylated amino acids were serine , sites with only  sites on histidine and  phosphorylated theronines and  tyrosines.
The interactome of E. coli has been studied by affinity purification and mass spectrometry APMS and by analyzing the binary interactions among its proteins.
Protein complexes. A  study purified , proteins from cultures of strain K and found interacting partners for , proteins, many of which had unknown functions at the time. A  study found , interactions between proteins of the same E. coli strain, though these data showed little overlap with those of the  publication.
Binary interactions. Rajagopala et al.  have carried out systematic yeast twohybrid screens with most E. coli proteins, and found a total of , proteinprotein interactions. This study also integrated genetic interactions and protein structures and mapped  interactions within  protein complexes.
E. coli belongs to a group of bacteria informally known as coliforms that are found in the gastrointestinal tract of warmblooded animals. E. coli normally colonizes an infant's gastrointestinal tract within  hours of birth, arriving with food or water or from the individuals handling the child.  In the bowel, E. coli adheres to the mucus of the large intestine. It is the primary facultative anaerobe of the human gastrointestinal tract. Facultative anaerobes are organisms that can grow in either the presence or absence of oxygen. As long as these bacteria do not acquire genetic elements encoding for virulence factors, they remain benign commensals.
Due to the low cost and speed with which it can be grown and modified in laboratory settings, E. coli is a popular expression platform for the production of recombinant proteins used in therapeutics. One advantage to using E. coli over another expression platform is that E. coli naturally does not export many proteins into the periplasm, making it easier to recover a protein of interest without crosscontamination. The E. coli K strains and their derivatives DH, DHα, MG, RV and W are the strains most widely used by the biotechnology industry. Nonpathogenic E. coli strain Nissle  EcN, Mutaflor and E. coli O:K:H Colinfant are used as probiotic agents in medicine, mainly for the treatment of various gastrointestinal diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease. It is thought that the EcN strain might impede the growth of opportunistic pathogens, including Salmonella and other coliform enteropathogens, through the production of microcin proteins the production of siderophores.
Most E. coli strains do not cause disease, naturally living in the gut, but virulent strains can cause gastroenteritis, urinary tract infections, neonatal meningitis, hemorrhagic colitis, and Crohn's disease.citation needed Common signs and symptoms include severe abdominal cramps, diarrhea, hemorrhagic colitis, vomiting, and sometimes fever. In rarer cases, virulent strains are also responsible for bowel necrosis tissue death and perforation without progressing to hemolyticuremic syndrome, peritonitis, mastitis, sepsis, and Gramnegative pneumonia. Very young children are more susceptible to develop severe illness, such as hemolytic uremic syndrome; however, healthy individuals of all ages are at risk to the severe consequences that may arise as a result of being infected with E. coli.
Some strains of E. coli, for example O:H, can produce Shiga toxin classified as a bioterrorism agent. The Shiga toxin causes inflammatory responses in target cells of the gut, leaving behind lesions which result in the bloody diarrhea that is a symptom of a Shiga toxinproducing E. coli STEC infection. This toxin further causes premature destruction of the red blood cells, which then clog the body's filtering system, the kidneys, in some rare cases usually in children and the elderly causing hemolyticuremic syndrome HUS, which may lead to kidney failure and even death. Signs of hemolytic uremic syndrome include decreased frequency of urination, lethargy, and paleness of cheeks and inside the lower eyelids. In  of HUS patients, complications of nervous system occur, which in turn causes strokes.  In addition, this strain causes the buildup of fluid since the kidneys do not work, leading to edema around the lungs, legs, and arms.  This increase in fluid buildup especially around the lungs impedes the functioning of the heart, causing an increase in blood pressure.
Uropathogenic E. coli UPEC is one of the main causes of urinary tract infections. It is part of the normal microbiota in the gut and can be introduced in many ways. In particular for females, the direction of wiping after defecation wiping back to front can lead to fecal contamination of the urogenital orifices. Anal intercourse can also introduce this bacterium into the male urethra, and in switching from anal to vaginal intercourse, the male can also introduce UPEC to the female urogenital system.
Enterotoxigenic E. coli ETEC is the most common cause of traveler's diarrhea, with as many as  million cases worldwide in developing countries each year. The bacteria, typically transmitted through contaminated food or drinking water, adheres to the intestinal lining, where it secretes either of two types of enterotoxins, leading to watery diarrhea. The rate and severity of infections are higher among children under the age of five, including as many as , deaths annually.
In May , one E. coli strain, O:H, was the subject of a bacterial outbreak that began in Germany. Certain strains of E. coli are a major cause of foodborne illness. The outbreak started when several people in Germany were infected with enterohemorrhagic E. coli EHEC bacteria, leading to hemolyticuremic syndrome HUS, a medical emergency that requires urgent treatment. The outbreak did not only concern Germany, but also  other countries, including regions in North America. On  June , the German Bundesinstitut für Risikobewertung BfR Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, a federal institute within the German Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection announced that seeds of fenugreek from Egypt were likely the cause of the EHEC outbreak.
Some studies have demonstrated an absence of E. coli in the gut flora of subjects with the metabolic disorder Phenylketonuria. It is hypothesized that the absence of these normal bacterium impairs the production of the key vitamins B riboflavin and K menaquinone  vitamins which are implicated in many physiological roles in humans such as cellular and bone metabolism  and so contributes to the disorder.
Carbapenemresistant E. coli carbapenemaseproducing E. coli that are resistant to the carbapenem class of antibiotics, considered the drugs of last resort for such infections. They are resistant because they produce an enzyme called a carbapenemase that disables the drug molecule.
The time between ingesting the STEC bacteria and feeling sick is called the "incubation period". The incubation period is usually – days after the exposure, but may be as short as  day or as long as  days. The symptoms often begin slowly with mild belly pain or nonbloody diarrhea that worsens over several days. HUS, if it occurs, develops an average  days after the first symptoms, when the diarrhea is improving.
Diagnosis of infectious diarrhea and identification of antimicrobial resistance is performed using a stool culture with subsequent antibiotic sensitivity testing. It requires a minimum of  days and maximum of several weeks to culture gastrointestinal pathogens.  The sensitivity true positive and specificity true negative rates for stool culture vary by pathogen, although a number of human pathogens can not be cultured. For culturepositive samples, antimicrobial resistance testing takes an additional – hours to perform.
Current point of care molecular diagnostic tests can identify E. coli and antimicrobial resistance in the identified strains much faster than culture and sensitivity testing. Microarraybased platforms can identify specific pathogenic strains of E. coli and E. colispecific AMR genes in two hours or less with high sensitivity and specificity, but the size of the test panel i.e., total pathogens and antimicrobial resistance genes is limited. Newer metagenomicsbased infectious disease diagnostic platforms are currently being developed to overcome the various limitations of culture and all currently available molecular diagnostic technologies.
The mainstay of treatment is the assessment of dehydration and replacement of fluid and electrolytes. Administration of antibiotics has been shown to shorten the course of illness and duration of excretion of enterotoxigenic E. coli ETEC in adults in endemic areas and in traveller's diarrhea, though the rate of resistance to commonly used antibiotics is increasing and they are generally not recommended. The antibiotic used depends upon susceptibility patterns in the particular geographical region. Currently, the antibiotics of choice are fluoroquinolones or azithromycin, with an emerging role for rifaximin. Oral rifaximin, a semisynthetic rifamycin derivative, is an effective and welltolerated antibacterial for the management of adults with noninvasive traveller's diarrhea. Rifaximin was significantly more effective than placebo and no less effective than ciprofloxacin in reducing the duration of diarrhea. While rifaximin is effective in patients with E. colipredominant traveller's diarrhea, it appears ineffective in patients infected with inflammatory or invasive enteropathogens.
ETEC is the type of E. coli that most vaccine development efforts are focused on. Antibodies against the LT and major CFs of ETEC provide protection against LTproducing, ETECexpressing homologous CFs. Oral inactivated vaccines consisting of toxin antigen and whole cells, i.e. the licensed recombinant cholera B subunit rCTBWC cholera vaccine Dukoral, have been developed. There are currently no licensed vaccines for ETEC, though several are in various stages of development. In different trials, the rCTBWC cholera vaccine provided high – shortterm protection. An oral ETEC vaccine candidate consisting of rCTB and formalin inactivated E. coli bacteria expressing major CFs has been shown in clinical trials to be safe, immunogenic, and effective against severe diarrhoea in American travelers but not against ETEC diarrhoea in young children in Egypt. A modified ETEC vaccine consisting of recombinant E. coli strains overexpressing the major CFs and a more LTlike hybrid toxoid called LCTBA, are undergoing clinical testing.
Other proven prevention methods for E. coli transmission include handwashing and improved sanitation and drinking water, as transmission occurs through fecal contamination of food and water supplies. Additionally, thoroughly cooking meat and avoiding consumption of raw, unpasteurized beverages, such as juices and milk are other proven methods for preventing E. coli. Lastly, avoid crosscontamination of utensils and work spaces when preparing food.
Because of its long history of laboratory culture and ease of manipulation, E. coli plays an important role in modern biological engineering and industrial microbiology. The work of Stanley Norman Cohen and Herbert Boyer in E. coli, using plasmids and restriction enzymes to create recombinant DNA, became a foundation of biotechnology.
E. coli is a very versatile host for the production of heterologous proteins, and various protein expression systems have been developed which allow the production of recombinant proteins in E. coli. Researchers can introduce genes into the microbes using plasmids which permit high level expression of protein, and such protein may be massproduced in industrial fermentation processes. One of the first useful applications of recombinant DNA technology was the manipulation of E. coli to produce human insulin.
Many proteins previously thought difficult or impossible to be expressed in E. coli in folded form have been successfully expressed in E. coli. For example, proteins with multiple disulphide bonds may be produced in the periplasmic space or in the cytoplasm of mutants rendered sufficiently oxidizing to allow disulphidebonds to form, while proteins requiring posttranslational modification such as glycosylation for stability or function have been expressed using the Nlinked glycosylation system of Campylobacter jejuni engineered into E. coli.
Modified E. coli cells have been used in vaccine development, bioremediation, production of biofuels, lighting, and production of immobilised enzymes.
Strain K is a mutant form of E. coli that overexpresses the enzyme Alkaline Phosphatase ALP. The mutation arises due to a defect in the gene that constantly codes for the enzyme. A gene that is producing a product without any inhibition is said to have constitutive activity. This particular mutant form is used to isolate and purify the aforementioned enzyme.
Strain OP of Escherichia coli is used for maintenance of Caenorhabditis elegans cultures.
Strain JM is a mutant form of E. coli that is recA and endA deficient. The strain can be utilized for bluewhite screening when the cells carry the fertility factor episome. Lack of recA decreases the possibility of unwanted restriction of the DNA of interest and lack of endA inhibit plasmid DNA decomposition. Thus, JM is useful for cloning and expression systems.
E. coli is frequently used as a model organism in microbiology studies. Cultivated strains e.g. E. coli K are welladapted to the laboratory environment, and, unlike wildtype strains, have lost their ability to thrive in the intestine. Many laboratory strains lose their ability to form biofilms. These features protect wildtype strains from antibodies and other chemical attacks, but require a large expenditure of energy and material resources. E. coli is often used as a representative microorganism in the research of novel water treatment and sterilisation methods, including photocatalysis. By standard plate count methods, following sequential dilutions, and growth on agar gel plates, the concentration of viable organisms or CFUs Colony Forming Units, in a known volume of treated water can be evaluated, allowing the comparative assessment of materials performance.
In , Joshua Lederberg and Edward Tatum first described the phenomenon known as bacterial conjugation using E. coli as a model bacterium, and it remains the primary model to study conjugation. E. coli was an integral part of the first experiments to understand phage genetics, and early researchers, such as Seymour Benzer, used E. coli and phage T to understand the topography of gene structure. Prior to Benzer's research, it was not known whether the gene was a linear structure, or if it had a branching pattern.
E. coli was one of the first organisms to have its genome sequenced; the complete genome of E. coli K was published by Science in 
From  to , a team at the Hungarian Academy of Science created a strain of Escherichia coli called MDS, which is now sold by Scarab Genomics of Madison, WI under the name of "Clean Genome E. coli", where  of the genome of the parental strain E. coli K MG were removed to aid in molecular biology efficiency, removing IS elements, pseudogenes and phages, resulting in better maintenance of plasmidencoded toxic genes, which are often inactivated by transposons. Biochemistry and replication machinery were not altered.
By evaluating the possible combination of nanotechnologies with landscape ecology, complex habitat landscapes can be generated with details at the nanoscale. On such synthetic ecosystems, evolutionary experiments with E. coli have been performed to study the spatial biophysics of adaptation in an island biogeography onchip.
In other studies, nonpathogenic E. coli has been used as a model microorganism towards understanding the effects of simulated microgravity on Earth on the same.
Since , scientists proposed the idea of genetic circuits used for computational tasks.  Collaboration between biologists and computing scientists has allowed designing digital logic gates on the metabolism of E. coli. As Lac operon is a twostage process, genetic regulation in the bacteria is used to realize computing functions. The process is controlled at the transcription stage of DNA into messenger RNA.
Studies are being performed attempting to program E. coli to solve complicated mathematics problems, such as the Hamiltonian path problem.
A computer to control protein production of E. coli within yeast cells has been developed. A method has also been developed to use bacteria to behave as an LCD screen.
In July , separate experiments with E. coli published on Nature showed the potential of using living cells for computing tasks and storing information. A team formed with collaborators of the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University and Harvards Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering developed a biological computer inside E. coli that responded to a dozen inputs. The team called the computer "ribocomputer", as it was composed of ribonucleic acid. Meanwhile, Harvard researchers probed that is possible to store information in bacteria after successfully archiving images and movies in the DNA of living E. coli cells.  In , a team led by biophysicist Sangram Bagh realized a study with E. coli to solve  x  maze problems to probe the principle for distributed computing among cells.
In , the GermanAustrian pediatrician Theodor Escherich discovered this organism in the feces of healthy individuals. He called it Bacterium coli commune because it is found in the colon. Early classifications of prokaryotes placed these in a handful of genera based on their shape and motility at that time Ernst Haeckel's classification of bacteria in the kingdom Monera was in place.
Bacterium coli was the type species of the now invalid genus Bacterium when it was revealed that the former type species "Bacterium triloculare" was missing. Following a revision of Bacterium, it was reclassified as Bacillus coli by Migula in  and later reclassified in the newly created genus Escherichia, named after its original discoverer.
In , the world's worst to date outbreak of E. coli food poisoning occurred in Wishaw, Scotland, killing  people. This death toll was exceeded in , when the  Germany E. coli O:H outbreak, linked to organic fenugreek sprouts, killed  people.
E. coli has several practical uses besides its use as a vector for genetic experiments and processes. For example, E. coli can be used to generate synthetic propane.
