
Faecalibacterium is a genus of bacteria. Its sole known species, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is grampositive, mesophilic, rodshaped, anaerobic and is one of the most abundant and important commensal bacteria of the human gut microbiota. It is nonspore forming and nonmotile. These bacteria produce butyrate and other shortchain fatty acids through the fermentation of dietary fiber.
Formerly considered to be a member of Fusobacterium, the bacterium is named in honor of German bacteriologist Otto Prausnitz. In , it was proposed to be reclassified as its own genus, Faecalibacterium, containing the species Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, as phylogenetic analysis from isolates showed it to be only distantly related to Fusobacterium, and a closer member of Clostridium cluster IV.
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii has a genome ,, bp long and has a GCcontent of .. The bacterium has been found to have , coding sequences, including  RNAs encoding genes.  metabolic pathways have been reconstructed, as well as  protein complexes and  tRNAs. Phylogenetically, the strains of F. prausnitzii compose phylogroups I and II. Most of the new isolates of this species isolated by M. Tanweer Khan belong to phylogroup II. A protein produced by this bacterium has been linked to antiinflammatory effects.
In healthy adults, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii represent more than  of the bacteria in the intestine, making it one of the most common gut bacteria. It has antiinflammatory properties and may improve the imbalance in intestinal bacteria that leads to dysbiosis.  Lower than usual levels of F. prausnitzii in the intestines have been associated with Crohn's disease, obesity, asthma and major depressive disorder,
and higher than usual levels have been associated with psoriasis. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii can improve gut barrier function.
In Crohn's disease, as of  most studies with one exception found reduced levels of F. prausnitzii; this has been found in both fecal and mucosal samples. However, it is a fastidious organism sensitive to oxygen and difficult to deliver to the intestine.
Exclusive enteral nutrition, which is known to induce remission in Crohn's, has been found to reduce F. prausnitzii in responders.
This Clostridialesrelated article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.