
N. animalis
N. animaloris
N. bacilliformis
N. canis
N. cinerea
N. dentiae
N. elongata
N. flava
N. flavescens
N. gonorrhoeae
N. iguanae
N. lactamica
N. macacae
N. meningitidis
N. mucosa
N. oralis
N. perflava
N. pharyngis
N. polysaccharea
N. shayeganii
N. sicca
N. subflava
N. wadsworthii
N. weaveri
N. zoodegmatis
Neisseria is a large genus of bacteria that colonize the mucosal surfaces of many animals.  Of the  species that colonize humans, only two are pathogens, N. meningitidis and N. gonorrhoeae. Most gonococcal infections are asymptomatic and selfresolving, and epidemic strains of the meningococcus may be carried in  of a population where systemic disease occurs at  prevalence.
Neisseria species are Gramnegative bacteria included among the Pseudomonadota, a large group of Gramnegative forms. Neisseria diplococci resemble coffee beans when viewed microscopically.
Species of this genus family Neisseriaceae of parasitic bacteria grow in pairs and occasionally tetrads, and thrive best at .ʡF ʡC in the animal body or serum media.
The genus includes:
These two species have the ability of 'breaching' the barrier. Local cytokines of the area become secreted to initiate an immune response. However, neutrophils are not able to do their job due to the ability of Neisseria to invade and replicate within neutrophils, as well avoiding phagocytosis and being killed by complement by resisting opsonization by antibodies, which target the pathogen for destruction.  Neisseria species are also able to alter their antigens to avoid being engulfed by a process called antigenic variation, which is observed primarily in surfacelocated molecules. The pathogenic species along with some commensal species, have type IV pili which serve multiple functions for this organism.  Some functions of the type IV pili include: mediating attachment to various cells and tissues, twitching motility,  natural competence, microcolony formation,  extensive intrastrain phase, and antigenic variation.
Neisseria bacteria have also been shown to be an important factor in the early stages of canine plaque development.
This genus also contains several, believed to be commensal, or nonpathogenic, species:
However, some of these can be associated with disease.
All the medically significant species of Neisseria are positive for both catalase and oxidase. Different Neisseria species can be identified by the sets of sugars from which they will produce acid. For example, N. gonorrhoeae makes acid from only glucose, but N. meningitidis produces acid from both glucose and maltose.
Polysaccharide capsule. N. meningitidis has a polysaccharide capsule that surrounds the outer membrane of the bacterium and protects against soluble immune effector mechanisms within the serum. It is considered to be an essential virulence factor for the bacteria. N. gonorrhoeae possesses no such capsule.
Unlike most other Gramnegative bacteria, which possess lipopolysaccharide LPS, both pathogenic and commensal species of Neisseria have a lipooligosaccharide LOS which consists of a core polysaccharide and lipid A. It functions as an endotoxin, protects against antimicrobial peptides, and adheres to the asialoglycoprotein receptor on urethral epithelium. LOS is highly stimulatory to the human immune system. LOS sialylation by the enzyme Lst prevents phagocytosis by neutrophils and complement deposition. LOS modification by phosphoethanolamine by the enzyme LptA provides resistance to antimicrobial peptides and complement. Strains of the same species have the ability to produce different LOS glycoforms.
The genus Neisseria is named after the German bacteriologist Albert Neisser, who in  discovered its first example, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the pathogen which causes the human disease gonorrhea. Neisser also codiscovered the pathogen that causes leprosy, Mycobacterium leprae. These discoveries were made possible by the development of new staining techniques which he helped to develop.
The genomes of at least  Neisseria species have been completely sequenced. The beststudied species are N. meningitidis with more than  strains and N. gonorrhoeae with at least  strains completely sequenced. Other complete genomes are available for N. elongata, N. lactamica, and N. weaveri. Whole genome shotgun sequences are available for hundreds of other species and strains. N. meningitidis encodes , to , proteins while N. gonorrhoeae encodes from , to , proteins. N. weaveri strain NCTC  has the smallest known genome with only , encoded proteins although N. meningitidis MC has been reported to have only  genes. The genomes are generally quite similar. For example, when the genome of N. gonorrhoeae strain FA is compared to that of N. meningitidis strain H  of their genes are shared.
Diseases caused by N. meningitidis and N. gonorrhoeae are significant health problems worldwide, the control of which is largely dependent on the availability and widespread use of comprehensive meningococcal and gonococcal vaccines. Development of neisserial vaccines has been challenging due to the nature of these organisms, in particular the heterogeneity, variability andor poor immunogenicity of their outer surface components. As strictly human pathogens, they are highly adapted to the host environment, but have evolved several mechanisms to remain adaptable to changing microenvironments and avoid elimination by the host immune system. Currently, serogroup A, B, C, Y, and W meningococcal infections can be prevented by vaccines. However, the prospect of developing a gonococcal vaccine is remote.
The acquisition of cephalosporin resistance in N. gonorrhoeae, particularly ceftriaxone resistance, has greatly complicated the treatment of gonorrhea, with the gonococcus now being classified as a "superbug".
Genetic transformation is the process by which a recipient bacterial cell takes up DNA from a neighboring cell and integrates this DNA into the recipients genome by recombination.  In N. meningitidis and N. gonorrhoeae, DNA transformation requires the presence of short DNA sequences  monomers residing in coding regions of the donor DNA.  These sequences are called DNA uptake sequences DUSs.  Specific recognition of DUSs is mediated by a type IV pilin.  Davidsen et al. reported that in N. meningitidis and N. gonorrhoeae, DUSs occur at a significantly higher density in genes involved in DNA repair and recombination as well as in restrictionmodification and replication than in other annotated gene groups.  These authors proposed that the overrepresentation of DUS in DNA repair and recombination genes may reflect the benefit of maintaining the integrity of the DNA repair and recombination machinery by preferentially taking up genome maintenance genes that could replace their damaged counterparts in the recipient cell.  Caugant and Maiden noted that the distribution of DUS is consistent with recombination being primarily a mechanism for genome repair that can occasionally result in generation of diversity, which even more occasionally, is adaptive.  It was also suggested by Michod et al. that an important benefit of transformation in N. gonorrhoeae is recombinational repair of oxidative DNA damages caused by oxidative attack by the hosts phagocytic cells.
The International Pathogenic Neisseria Conference IPNC, occurring every two years, is a forum for the presentation of cuttingedge research on all aspects of the genus Neisseria. This includes immunology, vaccinology, and physiology and metabolism of N. meningitidis, N. gonorrhoeae and the commensal species. The first IPNC took place in , and the most recent one was in September . Normally, the location of the conference switches between North America and Europe, but it took place in Australia for the first time in , where the venue was located in Cairns.
