
Streptococcus is a genus of grampositive coccus plural cocci or spherical bacteria that belongs to the family Streptococcaceae, within the order Lactobacillales lactic acid bacteria, in the phylum Bacillota.  Cell division in streptococci occurs along a single axis, so as they grow, they tend to form pairs or chains that may appear bent or twisted. This differs from staphylococci, which divide along multiple axes, thereby generating irregular, grapelike clusters of cells. Most streptococci are oxidasenegative and catalasenegative, and many are facultative anaerobes capable of growth both aerobically and anaerobically.
The term was coined in  by Viennese surgeon Albert Theodor Billroth –, by combining the prefix "strepto" from Ancient Greek: στρεπτός, romanized: streptós, lit. 'easily twisted, pliant', together with the suffix "coccus" from Modern Latin: coccus, from Ancient Greek: κόκκος, romanized: kókkos, lit. 'grain, seed, berry'. In , many bacteria formerly grouped in the genus Streptococcus were separated out into the genera Enterococcus and Lactococcus. Currently, over  species are recognised in this genus. This genus has been found to be part of the salivary microbiome.
In addition to streptococcal pharyngitis strep throat, certain Streptococcus species are responsible for many cases of pink eye, meningitis, bacterial pneumonia, endocarditis, erysipelas, and necrotizing fasciitis the 'flesheating' bacterial infections. However, many streptococcal species are not pathogenic, and form part of the commensal human microbiota of the mouth, skin, intestine, and upper respiratory tract. Streptococci are also a necessary ingredient in producing Emmentaler "Swiss" cheese.citation needed
Species of Streptococcus are classified based on their hemolytic properties. Alphahemolytic species cause oxidization of iron in hemoglobin molecules within red blood cells, giving it a greenish color on blood agar. Betahemolytic species cause complete rupture of red blood cells.  On blood agar, this appears as wide areas clear of blood cells surrounding bacterial colonies. Gammahemolytic species cause no hemolysis.citation needed
Betahemolytic streptococci are further classified by Lancefield grouping, a serotype classification that is, describing specific carbohydrates present on the bacterial cell wall. The  described serotypes are named Lancefield groups A to W excluding I and J. This system of classification was developed by Rebecca Lancefield, a scientist at Rockefeller University.citation needed
In the medical setting, the most important groups are the alphahemolytic streptococci S. pneumoniae and Streptococcus viridans group, and the betahemolytic streptococci of Lancefield groups A and B also known as group A strep and group B strep.
Table: Medically relevant streptococci not all are alphahemolytic
When alphahemolysis αhemolysis is present, the agar under the colony will appear dark and greenish due to the conversion of hemoglobin to green biliverdin. Streptococcus pneumoniae and a group of oral streptococci Streptococcus viridans or viridans streptococci display alphahemolysis.
Alphahemolysis is also termed incomplete hemolysis or partial hemolysis because the cell membranes of the red blood cells are left intact. This is also sometimes called green hemolysis because of the color change in the agar.
Betahemolysis βhemolysis, sometimes called complete hemolysis, is a complete lysis of red cells in the media around and under the colonies: the area appears lightened yellow and transparent. Streptolysin, an exotoxin, is the enzyme produced by the bacteria which causes the complete lysis of red blood cells. There are two types of streptolysin: Streptolysin O SLO and streptolysin S SLS. Streptolysin O is an oxygensensitive cytotoxin, secreted by most group A Streptococcus GAS, and interacts with cholesterol in the membrane of eukaryotic cells mainly red and white blood cells, macrophages, and platelets, and usually results in betahemolysis under the surface of blood agar. Streptolysin S is an oxygenstable cytotoxin also produced by most GAS strains which results in clearing on the surface of blood agar. SLS affects immune cells, including polymorphonuclear leukocytes and lymphocytes, and is thought to prevent the host immune system from clearing infection. Streptococcus pyogenes, or GAS, displays beta hemolysis.
Some weakly betahemolytic species cause intense hemolysis when grown together with a strain of Staphylococcus. This is called the CAMP test. Streptococcus agalactiae displays this property. Clostridium perfringens can be identified presumptively with this test. Listeria monocytogenes is also positive on sheep's blood agar.
Group A S. pyogenes  is the causative agent in a wide range of group A streptococcal infections GAS. These infections may be noninvasive or invasive. The noninvasive infections tend to be more common and less severe. The most common of these infections include streptococcal pharyngitis strep throat and impetigo. Scarlet fever is also a noninvasive infection, but has not been as common in recent years.
The invasive infections caused by group A betahemolytic streptococci tend to be more severe and less common. This occurs when the bacterium is able to infect areas where it is not usually found, such as the blood and the organs. The diseases that may be caused include streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, necrotizing fasciitis, pneumonia, and bacteremia. Globally, GAS has been estimated to cause more than , deaths every year, making it one of the world's leading pathogens.
Additional complications may be caused by GAS, namely acute rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis. Rheumatic fever, a disease that affects the joints, kidneys, and heart valves, is a consequence of untreated strep A infection caused not by the bacterium itself. Rheumatic fever is caused by the antibodies created by the immune system to fight off the infection crossreacting with other proteins in the body. This "crossreaction" causes the body to essentially attack itself and leads to the damage above. A similar autoimmune mechanism initiated by Group A betahemolytic streptococcal GABHS infection is hypothesized to cause pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections PANDAS, wherein autoimmune antibodies affect the basal ganglia, causing rapid onset of psychiatric, motor, sleep, and other symptoms in pediatric patients.
GAS infection is generally diagnosed with a rapid strep test or by culture.
S. agalactiae, or group B streptococcus, GBS, causes pneumonia and meningitis in newborns and the elderly, with occasional systemic bacteremia. Importantly, Streptococcus agalactiae is the most common cause of meningitis in infants from one month to three months old. They can also colonize the intestines and the female reproductive tract, increasing the risk for premature rupture of membranes during pregnancy, and transmission of the organism to the infant. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Academy of Pediatrics, and the Centers for Disease Control recommend all pregnant women between  and  weeks gestation to be tested for GBS. Women who test positive should be given prophylactic antibiotics during labor, which will usually prevent transmission to the infant.
The United Kingdom has chosen to adopt a risk factorbased protocol, rather than the culturebased protocol followed in the US. Current guidelines state that if one or more of the following risk factors is present, then the woman should be treated with intrapartum antibiotics:
This protocol results in the administration of intrapartum antibiotics to – of pregnant women and prevention of – of cases of early onset GBS sepsis.
This group includes S. equi, which causes strangles in horses, and S. zooepidemicusS. equi is a clonal descendant or biovar of the ancestral S. zooepidemicuswhich causes infections in several species of mammals, including cattle and horses. S. dysgalactiae subsp. dysgalactiae is also a member of group C, betahaemolytic streptococci that can cause pharyngitis and other pyogenic infections similar to group A streptococci.
Many former group D streptococci have been reclassified and placed in the genus Enterococcus including E. faecalis, E. faecium, E. durans, and E. avium. For example, Streptococcus faecalis is now Enterococcus faecalis. E. faecalis is sometimes alphahemolytic and E. faecium is sometimes beta hemolytic.
The remaining nonenterococcal group D strains include Streptococcus gallolyticus, Streptococcus bovis and Streptococcus equinus.
Nonhemolytic streptococci rarely cause illness. However, weakly hemolytic group D betahemolytic streptococci and Listeria monocytogenes which is actually a grampositive bacillus should not be confused with nonhemolytic streptococci.
Group F streptococci were first described in  by Long and Bliss amongst the "minute haemolytic streptococci". They are also known as Streptococcus anginosus according to the Lancefield classification system or as members of the S. milleri group according to the European system.
These streptococci are usually, but not exclusively, betahemolytic. Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. canis is the predominant subspecies encountered. It is a particularly common GGS in humans, although it is typically found on animals. S. phocae is a GGS subspecies that has been found in marine mammals and marine fish species. In marine mammals it has been mainly associated with meningoencephalitis, sepsis, and endocarditis, but is also associated with many other pathologies. Its environmental reservoir and means of transmission in marine mammals is not well characterized.
Group H streptococci cause infections in mediumsized canines. Group H streptococci rarely cause  human illness unless a human has direct contact with the mouth of a canine. One of the most common ways this can be spread is humantocanine, mouthtomouth contact. However, the canine may lick the human's hand and infection can be spread, as well.
Streptococci have been divided into six groups on the basis of their S rDNA sequences: S. anginosus, S. gallolyticus, S. mitis, S. mutans, S. pyogenes and S. salivarius. The S groups have been confirmed by whole genome sequencing see figure. The important pathogens S. pneumoniae and S. pyogenes belong to the S. mitis and S. pyogenes groups, respectively, while the causative agent of dental caries, Streptococcus mutans, is basal to the Streptococcus group.
Recent technological advances have resulted in an increase of available genome sequences for Streptococcus species, allowing for more robust and reliable phylogenetic and comparative genomic analyses to be conducted. In , the evolutionary relationships within Streptococcus was reexamined by Patel and Gupta through the analysis of comprehensive phylogenetic trees constructed based on four different datasets of proteins and the identification of  highly specific molecular signatures in the form of conserved signature indels that are exclusively shared by the entire genus or its distinct subclades.
The results revealed the presence of two main clades at the highest level within Streptococcus, termed the MitisSuis and PygogenesEquinusMutans clades. The MitisSuis main clade comprises the Suis subclade and the Mitis clade, which encompasses the Angiosus, Pneumoniae, Gordonii and Parasanguinis subclades. The second main clade, the PygogenesEquinusMutans, includes the Pyogenes, Mutans, Salivarius, Equinus, Sobrinus, Halotolerans, Porci, Entericus and Orisratti subclades. In total,  distinct subclades have been identified within the genus Streptococcus, each supported by reliable branching patterns in phylogenetic trees and by the presence of multiple conserved signature indels in different proteins that are distinctive characteristics of the members of these  clades. A summary diagram showing the overall relationships among the Streptococcus based on these studies is depicted in a figure on this page.
The genomes of hundreds of species have been sequenced. Most Streptococcus genomes are . to . Mb in size and encode , to , proteins. Some important genomes are listed in the table. The four species shown in the table S. pyogenes, S. agalactiae, S. pneumoniae, and S. mutans have an average pairwise protein sequence identity of about .
Bacteriophages have been described for many species of Streptococcus.  prophages have been described in S. pneumoniae that range in size from  to  kb in size, encoding from  to  genes each.citation needed Some of the first Streptococcus phages discovered were Dp
and ω alias ω.
In  the Cp Complutense phage , officially Streptococcus virus Cp, Picovirinae family was discovered with Cp as its first member. Dp and Cp infect both S. pneumoniae and S. mitis. However, the host ranges of most Streptococcus phages have not been investigated systematically.
Natural genetic transformation involves the transfer of DNA from one bacterium to another through the surrounding medium.  Transformation is a complex process dependent on expression of numerous genes.  To be capable of transformation a bacterium must enter a special physiologic state referred to as competence. S. pneumoniae, S. mitis and S. oralis can become competent, and as a result actively acquire homologous DNA for transformation by a predatory fratricidal mechanism   This fratricidal mechanism mainly exploits noncompetent siblings present in the same niche    Among highly competent isolates of S. pneumoniae, Li et al. showed that nasal colonization fitness and virulence lung infectivity depend on an intact competence system.  Competence may allow the streptococcal pathogen to use external homologous DNA for recombinational repair of DNA damages caused by the hosts oxidative attack.
